# Overlay Specification

#### Version 1.0.0

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [BCP 14](https://tools.ietf.org/html/bcp14) [RFC2119](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119) [RFC8174](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8174) when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.

This document is licensed under [The Apache License, Version 2.0](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.html).

## Introduction

TBD

## Table of Contents

- [Definitions](#definitions)
	- [Overlay Document](#overlayDocument)
- [Specification](#specification)
	- [Versions](#versions)
	- [Format](#format)
	- [Document Structure](#documentStructure)
	- [Data Types](#dataTypes)
	- [Relative References In URLs](#relativeReferencesURL)
	- [Schema](#schema)
		- [Overlay Object](#overlayObject)
		- [Info Object](#infoObject)
		- [Action Object](#actionObject)
	- [Examples](#examples)
	- [Specification Extensions](#specificationExtensions)
- [Appendix A: Revision History](#revisionHistory)
	

## Definitions

##### <a name="overlayDocument"></a>Overlay Document
An overlay document contains an ordered list of [Action Objects](#overlayActions) that are to be applied to the target document. Each [Action Object](#actionObject) has a `target` property and a modifier type (`update` or `remove`).  The `target` property is a [JSONPath](https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/jsonpath/documents/) query expression that identifies the elements of the target document to be updated and the modifier determines the change.

## Specification

### Versions

TBD

### Format

An Overlay document that conforms to the Overlay Specification is itself a JSON object, which may be represented either in JSON or YAML format.

All field names in the specification are **case sensitive**.
This includes all fields that are used as keys in a map, except where explicitly noted that keys are **case insensitive**.

In order to preserve the ability to round-trip between YAML and JSON formats, YAML version [1.2](https://yaml.org/spec/1.2/spec.html) is RECOMMENDED along with some additional constraints:

- Tags MUST be limited to those allowed by the [JSON Schema ruleset](https://yaml.org/spec/1.2/spec.html#id2803231).
- Keys used in YAML maps MUST be limited to a scalar string, as defined by the [YAML Failsafe schema ruleset](https://yaml.org/spec/1.2/spec.html#id2802346).

### <a name="documentStructure"></a>Document Structure

It is RECOMMENDED that the root Overlay document be named: overlay.json or overlay.yaml.

### <a name="dataTypes"></a>Data Types

TBD

### <a name="relativeReferencesURL"></a>Relative References in URLs

Unless specified otherwise, all properties that are URLs MAY be relative references as defined by [RFC3986](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3986#section-4.2).
Unless specified otherwise, relative references are resolved using the URL of the referring document.

### Schema

In the following description, if a field is not explicitly **REQUIRED** or described with a MUST or SHALL, it can be considered OPTIONAL.

#### <a name="overlayObject"></a>Overlay Object

This is the root object of the [Overlay document](#overlayDocument).

##### Fixed Fields

Field Name | Type | Description
---|:---:|---
<a name="overlayVersion"></a>overlay | `string` | **REQUIRED**. This string MUST be the [version number](#versions) of the Overlay Specification that the Overlay document uses. The `overlay` field SHOULD be used by tooling to interpret the Overlay document. 
<a name="overlayInfo"></a>info | [Info Object](#infoObject) | **REQUIRED**. Provides metadata about the Overlay. The metadata MAY be used by tooling as required.
<a name="overlayExtends"></a> extends | `string` | URL to the target document (such as an OpenAPI document) this overlay applies to. This MUST be in the form of a URL.
<a name="overlayActions"></a>actions | [[Action Object](#actionObject)] | **REQUIRED** An ordered list of actions to be applied to the target document. The array MUST contain at least one value.

This object MAY be extended with [Specification Extensions](#specificationExtensions).

The list of actions MUST be applied in sequential order to ensure a consistent outcome. Actions are applied to the result of the previous updates. This enables objects to be deleted in one update and then re-created in a subsequent update, for example.

The `extends` property can be used to indicate that the Overlay was designed to update a specific OpenAPI document. Where no `extends` is provided it is the responsibility of tooling to apply the Overlay documents to the appropriate OpenAPI document(s).

#### <a name="infoObject"></a>Info Object

The object provides metadata about the Overlay.
The metadata MAY be used by the clients if needed.

##### Fixed Fields

Field Name | Type | Description
---|:---:|---
<a name="infoTitle"></a>title | `string` | **REQUIRED**. A human readable description of the purpose of the overlay.
<a name="infoVersion"></a>version | `string` | **REQUIRED**. A version identifer for indicating changes to the Overlay document.


This object MAY be extended with [Specification Extensions](#specificationExtensions).

#### <a name="actionObject"></a>Action Object

This object represents one or more changes to be applied to the target document at the location defined by the target JSONPath expression.

##### Fixed Fields

Field Name | Type | Description
---|:---:|---
<a name="actionTarget"></a>target | `string` | **REQUIRED** A JSONPath query expression referencing the target objects in the target document.
<a name="actionDescription"></a>description | `string` | A description of the action. [CommonMark syntax](https://spec.commonmark.org/) MAY be used for rich text representation.
<a name="actionUpdate"></a>update | Any | If the `target` of this action object is an object, this field should be an object with the properties and values to merge with the `target`. If the `target` of this action is an array, this field should be an entry to append to the array. To replace an array in its entirety, apply a remove action followed by an update action. This field has no impact if the `remove` field of this action object is `true`.
<a name="actionRemove"></a>remove | `boolean` | A boolean value that indicates that the target object is to be removed from the the map or array it is contained in. The default value is `false`.

The result of the `target` JSONPath query expression must be zero or more objects or arrays (not primitive types or `null` values). If you wish to update a primitive value such as a string, the `target` expression should select the *containing* object in the target document.

The properties of the update object MUST be compatible with the target object referenced by the JSONPath key. When the Overlay document is applied, the properties in the merge object replace properties in the target object with the same name and new properties are appended to the target object.

This object MAY be extended with [Specification Extensions](#specificationExtensions).

### Examples

#### Structured Overlays Example

When updating properties throughout the target document it may be more efficient to create a single `Action Object` that mirrors the structure of the target document. e.g.

```yaml
overlay: 1.0.0
info:
  title: Structured Overlay
  version: 1.0.0
actions:
- target: "$"   # Root of document
  update:
    info:
      x-overlay-applied: structured-overlay
    paths:
      "/":
        summary: "The root resource"
        get:
          summary: "Retrieve the root resource"
          x-rate-limit: 100
      "/pets":
        get:
          summary: "Retrieve a list of pets"
          x-rate-limit: 100
    components:
    tags:
```

#### Targeted Overlays

Alternatively, where only a small number of updates need to be applied to a large document, each [Action Object](#actionObject) MAY be more targeted.

```yaml
overlay: 1.0.0
info:
  title: Targeted Overlays
  version: 1.0.0
actions:
- target: $.paths['/foo'].get
  update:
    description: This is the new description
- target: $.paths['/bar'].get
  update:
    description: This is the updated description
- target: $.paths['/bar']
  update:
    post:
      description: This is an updated description of a child object
      x-safe: false
```

#### Wildcard Overlays Examples

One significant advantage of using the JSONPath syntax is that it allows referencing multiple nodes in the target document.  This would allow a single update object to be applied to multiple target objects using wildcards and other multi-value selectors.

```yaml
overlay: 1.0.0
info:
  title: Update many objects at once
  version: 1.0.0
actions:
- target: $.paths.*.get
  update:
    x-safe: true
- target: $.paths.*.get.parameters[?@.name=='filter' && @.in=='query']
  update:
    schema:
      $ref: "/components/schemas/filterSchema"
```

#### Array Modification Examples

Array elements MAY be deleted using the `remove` property.  Use of array indexes to remove array items should be avoided where possible as indexes will change when items are removed.

```yaml
overlay: 1.0.0
info:
  title: Add an array element
  version: 1.0.0
actions:
- target: $.paths.*.get.parameters
  update:
    name: newParam
    in: query
```

```yaml
overlay: 1.0.0
info:
  title: Remove a array element
  version: 1.0.0
actions:
- target: $.paths.*.get.parameters[?@.name == 'dummy']
  remove: true
```

#### Traits Examples

By annotating a target document (such as an OpenAPI document) using specification extensions such as `x-oai-traits`, the author of the target document MAY identify where overlay updates should be applied.

```yaml
openapi: 3.1.0
info:
  title: API with a paged collection
  version: 1.0.0
paths:
  /items:
    get:
      x-oai-traits: ["paged"]
      responses:
        200:
          description: OK
```

With the above OpenAPI document, the following Overlay document will apply the necessary updates to describe how paging is implemented, where that trait has been applied.

```yaml
overlay: 1.0.0
info:
  title: Apply Traits
  version: 1.0.0
actions:
- target: $.paths.*.get[?@.x-oai-traits.paged]
  update:
    parameters:
      - name: top
        in: query
        # ...
      - name: skip
        in: query
        # ...
```

This approach allows inversion of control as to where the Overlay updates apply to the target document itself.

### <a name="specificationExtensions"></a>Specification Extensions

While the Overlay Specification tries to accommodate most use cases, additional data can be added to extend the specification at certain points.

The extension properties are implemented as patterned fields that are always prefixed by `"x-"`.

Field Pattern | Type | Description
---|:---:|---
<a name="overlayExtensions"></a>^x- | Any | Allows extensions to the Overlay Specification. The field name MUST begin with `x-`, for example, `x-internal-id`. Field names beginning `x-oai-` and `x-oas-` are reserved for uses defined by the [OpenAPI Initiative](https://www.openapis.org/). The value MAY be `null`, a primitive, an array or an object.

The extensions may or may not be supported by the available tooling, but those may be extended as well to add requested support (if tools are internal or open-sourced).


## <a name="revisionHistory"></a>Appendix A: Revision History

Version   | Date       | Notes
---       | ---        | ---
1.0.0     | TBD        | First release of the Overlay Specification
